10 mit-raca.

Anglo-Saxon and into the Anglo-Norman period.
Geoft'rey of Monmouth's work was written at the
instigation of Robert earl of Gloucester, to whom
it was dedicateffl, and we learn from Gaimar's own
account οἱ the matter that Walter Espec, a well-
lmown Yorkshire baron of that time, having
obtained a copy of it from earl Roberthimself, the
lady Coustance, through her husband, procured the
loan of it in order that Gaimar might make a tran-
slation. How far he followed or varied from his
original, we have no longer the oppmtunity of
judging, for that part of Gaimar's work, eclipsed, it

‘would appear, by the subsequent translation by
Wace, fell into neglect, and seems now to have
perished. The supplementary portion of Gaimar’s
chronicle, the history of the Angla-Saxon kings,
was more esteemed, and copies of it being multi-
plied in manuscript, four of them have fortunately
been preserved. At the end, he intimates an
intention οἱ writing a separate history of the reign
of Henry I. (see l. 6483), hut we have no means of
ascertaining if he ever carried this design into
effect; his chroniele, as now preserved, ends with
the death of William Rufus.

Gaimar makes several allusions, especially at the
end of this book, to the sources from whence he
derived the materials of his history of the Anglo-
Saxons3 they are in some respects obscure, but
we learn from thern, which however is sufficiently

